Betonade stavelser i klingonska.

Nedanstående resonemang baseras sig på endast en källa, nämligen
<The Klingon Dictionary> (Okrand, 1992), de fåtalet stycken som där
går igenom betoning (kapitel 1.3) plus en utförlig analys av vad som
i klingonisters mun kommit att kallas "fusk-listan"¹ (eng. "cheat
sheet", sidorna 170-172) - en lista med bra-att-ha fraser, som
utöver den vanliga translittereringen försetts med en förenklad
translitterering för den oinvigde. Denna förenklade translitterering
(som bara förekommer på fusk-listan) markerar, till skillnad från
den ordinära okrandiska dito, även vilka stavelser som skall betonas.

Som hjälp och inspiration har jag även använt mig av Klingonska
språkinstitutes nya utgåva av Hamlet², som bl.a. innehåller ett
appendix med instruktioner (icke kanoniska sådana får jag förmoda)
för hur vers bör läsas på klingonska (med avséende på rytm).



Ur <The Klingon Dictionary>:
===============================================================

1.3. Stress

Each Klingon word of more than one syllable normally contains one
stressed (or accented) syllable. The stressed syllable is pronounced
at a slightly higher pitch and with a little more force than the
nonstressed syllable(s).

In a verb, the stressed syllable is usually the verb itself, as
opposed to any prefix or suffix. If, however, a suffix ending with
{'} is separated from the verb by at least one other suffix, both
the verb and the suffix ending in {'} are stressed. In addition, if
the meaning of any particular suffix is to be emphasized, the stress
may shift to that syllable. Suffixes indicating negation or emphasis
(section 4.3) are frequently stressed, as is the interrogative
suffix (section 4.2.9).

In a noun, the stressed syllable is usually the syllable right
before the first noun suffix, or the final syllable if there is no
suffix. If, however, a syllable ending in {'} is present, it is
usually stressed instead. If there are two syllables in a row {'}
both ending in {'}, both are equally stressed.

Finally, it should be noted that there are some words which seem to
have variable stress patterns, with the stress sometimes heard on
one syllable and sometimes on another. This phenomenon is not yet
understood. The rules given above do not account for this
variability, but if they are followed, stress will wind up on
acceptable syllables.

In the system used to transcribe Klingon in this dictionary, stress
is not indicated.

===============================================================

Ur <The Klingon Dictionary>:
===============================================================

Readers who wish do declaim <Khamlet> properly should be aware that
the notes on stress in Okrand (2292), while accurate, are not always
explicit. Therefore, the following brief guide may be of some help:

Nouns are stressed on the final syllable of the stem: {ghóp} <hand>,
{puyjáq} <nova>, {bortás} <revenge>. Any suffixes added on to the
stem are not stressed: {puyjáqvam} <this nova>, {bortáSmey}
<revenges>.

However, if any syllable in a noun, whether in the stem or in a
suffix, ends in a glottal stop, it is stressed instead of the the
stem's final syllable. Thus: {bó'DIj} <court>, {ghopDú'} <hands>,
{puyjaqvó'} <from the nova>. Adjacent syllables ending in glottal
stops receive equal stress: {chú'wÍ'} <trigger>, although Klingon
verse tends to stress the latter. Note that nouns derived from verbs
are considered nouns: {vúm} <to work>, {vumwÍ'} <worker>,
{vumtaHghách} <working>, {vumpú'ghach} <a bout of work>.

Verbs are likewise stressed on the final syllable of the stem: {Dál}
<to be boring>, {ghIpDÍj} <to court-martial>. Unlike nouns, if the
first suffix after the verb ends in a glottal stop, the suffix is
<not> stressed. Thus the verb <she has been an alien> is {nóvpu'},
while the noun <aliens> in {novpú'}. If the suffix ending in a
glottal stop is <other> than the first, then both it and the final
syllable of the verb re stressed: {mughIpDÍjchoHDÍ'} <when she
started court-martialling me>, {HóH'eghrupmó'} <because he was ready
to suicide>.

Semantically important suffixes can end up stressed instead of the
verb stem. In practice in Klingon metre (which systematises this
tendency) negative and interrogative suffixes are <always> stressed:
{jIDalbé'} <I am not boring>, {bImatlhHá'} <you are disloyal>,
{luDelQó'} <they refuse to describe it>, {chol'á'} <is he coming?>
Note that adjectival verbs are considered verbs: {'útlh mátlhqu'} <a
truly loyal officer>. There are often cases where monosyllabic verbs
and nouns are juxtaposed. In this text, adjectival verbs and subject
nouns tend to be stressed more strongly, following an iambic
pattern. Thus {'utlh mátlh} <a loyal officer>, {matlh 'útlh} <the
officer is loyal>.

===============================================================




------------------
¹ Jag bortser helt ifrån fraserna på första sidan i boken, då
samtliga av dessa också förekommer i fusk-listan.

² Vilken nu är den tredje översättningen (till klingonska) av verket
ifråga som hittat vägen till min bokhylla.

³


Annat:
{ghobé'} {HIjá'} {HISláH} {majQá'} {nuqnéH}

Subst:
{bIghHá'Daq} {Dóchvam} {Dóchvetlh} {DújlIj'e'} {ghÍchraj} {Há'DIbaH}
{mÍvvam} {naDevvó'} {naDév} {puchpá''e'} {Qaplá'} {QumwÍ'wIj}
{qúSDaq} {tlhÍngan} {tlhInganpú'} {tlháqwIj} {táchDaq} {wáqwIj}
{veQDúj} {núqDaq}

Verb:
{bIHégh} {bIjeghbé'chugh} {bIjátlh} {bIlughbé'} {bIléSnIS} {bIlúgh}
{bImoHqú'} {bInép} {bIpIvHá'law'} {bá'lu''a'} {chop'á'}
{chu'Há'lu'pu'} {Dajatlh'á'} {DalaD'á'} {DanéH} {Dapól}
{Daqáwlu'taH} {Do'Há'} {Du'ÍHchoHmoH} {DÍlmeH} {HIghóS} {HIjól}
{jIQóng} {jISáHbe'} {jIwúQ} {jIyájbe'} {jIyáj} {jÍHpu'bé'}
{jÍHtaHbogh} {jáblu'DÍ'} {maghóm} {QaQqú'} {qaSuj'á'} {qay'bé'}
{qáStaHvIS} {qétbogh} {SÍjlaH} {tIvóqtaH} {tujqú'choH} {tú'lu'}
{tújchoHpu'} {vIghajbé'} {vIghÍtlhta'bogh} {vIjátlhlaHbé'}
{vIlamHá'choHmoH} {vIlán} {vIléghpu'} {vIló'} {vISovbé'}
{vISóplaHbé'} {vItlhútlhlaHbé'} {vItá'pu'bé'} {vItú'laHbé'} {wIgháj}
{yaj'á'} {yIchú'} {yIDÍl} {yIghóS} {yIHótlh} {yIja'Qó'} {yIjatlhQó'}
{yIjé'} {yImév} {yItámchoH} {'oy''á'}

subst+adj:
{Qe' QáQ'e'} {wanÍ' ramqú'} {bortáS bIr} {wa' ram} {loS SaD Hugh}

monosyllabic words (not useful):

{batlh} {chay'} {DaH} {ghorgh} {lu'} {luq} {not} {pItlh} {Qo'} {reH}
{toH} {tugh} {vaj} {'ar} {'e'} {'oH} {loS SaD} {wa'}

{bIQ} {Duj} {ghItlh} {Hol} {Huch} {jol} {loD} {nay'} {nIn} {pa'}
{pIch} {QuQ} {yuch} {Hugh} {ram} {Qe'}

{boch} {qaS} {bIr}


====================================================================

Nouns:

  o The final syllable of the noun stem is stressed (except if
    another syllable ends in a glottal stop, see below).

  o If any syllable (suffix or syllable in the noun stem) ends in a
    glottal stop it is stressed instead.

  o If there are more than one syllable ending in a glottal stop,
    then they are equally stressed.

  o Nouns derived from verbs (using {-wI'} or {-ghach}) are
    considered nouns.

  o Compound nouns are stressed as simple nouns (i.e. only the last
    noun's final syllable is actually considered a final syllable).


Verbs:

  o The first prefix is never stressed.

  o The final syllable of the verb stem is stressed (except if a
    suffix is emphasized, see below).

  o The first verb suffix is not stressed (except if it is
    emphasized, see below).

  o All suffixes, apart from the first, are stressed if they end
    in a glottal stop. (unless some suffix is emphasized, see
    below).

  o If a suffix is emphasized, then it is the *only* syllable in
    the word that is stressed.

    The most commonly emphasized suffixes are the ones indicating
    negatation ({-be'}/{-Ha'}/{-Qo'}), emphasis ({-qu'}) and the
    interrogative suffix ({-'a'}).

  o Adjectival verbs are considered verbs.


Exclamations (adverbials etc?):

  o The final syllable is stressed.

====================================================================
